Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's lecture
we're going to look at a somewhat more advanced
topic where we take our projective quadruple quad
formula and apply to the interesting classical
question about the relationship between the sides
of a cyclic quadrilateral and the radius of the
circle that contains that quadrilateral so today's
lecture is going to be sort of the culmination of
a series of videos that I've been making that
show you how to start thinking about geometry
algebraically and we basically just started with
a one dimensional point of view both the apine
and the projective situation and and we've seen
that this onedimensional point of view really has
extensions in a lot of different directions allows
us to reformulate many classical important results
and that will also be the case today so there'll
be some algebraic say sophistication a little
bit uh today but still I hope you can follow it
all okay so we're going to go back in time to a
another very fabulous and interesting result
uh called parames virus formula okay so it's
a formula for the radius little r of a circle
that contains a cyclic quadrilateral with side
lengths little a b c and d so paramesvara was a
Indian mathematician who lived in Kerala it's a
state in the southern part of India uh that had
a very vibrant mathematical and astronomical uh
history and Heritage and at this time they were
very um prolific work being done there okay and
here's his lovely formula which is a little bit
reminiscent of brahmagupta's formula in fact it
contains a term very much like the one we find
in brahmagupta's Formula so it's at R 2 equals
the product ab+ CD a C + b d a d + b c divid 16
* s - A a s- b s- c s- d where s is this semi
perimeter term that we've seen a number of times
now the sum of the four side lengths divided by
two well we can rewrite this because we
recognize that this denominator here is
exactly what we call the quadria of this
cyclic quadrilateral I remind you that was
ultimately 16 * the square of the area that
script A stands for quadria so this is just
a little bit shorter way of writing it and
if we want to write things purely in terms
of the four lengths a b c d we can replace
this expression with uh this expression
here so very beautiful formula and uh although
it's very nice for us again it's problematic
because it's all in terms of these lengths and we
know that lengths in two-dimensional geometry are
in fact transcendental quantities they're
things that you can only obtain by running
infinite processes typically square root process
uh to Infinity okay so although they are so maybe
physically very seemingly uh natural Notions
mathematically they are more problematic and
we would like to frame frame this result in an
alternate way purely algebraically involving the
quadrant of the various quantities instead of
the actual lengths so you will know by now that
my point of view towards mathematical theories
is that they should be supported by examples we
should be able to explicitly lay out a situation
which encodes our abstract Theory where everything
is precise and concrete and we can check the
various claims made by actually making complete
and correct calculations so let's have a look
at pares vara's formula in a specific example
I'm going to choose for something a little bit
different the circle x^2 + y^2 = two okay which
has a circum quadrants of two goes through the
point 1 one it goes through some other points as
well for example you can check that these various
points that I've got got here are also points on
this circle here we have - 713 and 1713 here we
have 23 over 17 and - 7 over 17 and here we have
- 75s - 1/5 and I hope uh you know or can figure
out how we could generate more such points on
such a circle so let's take that particular cyclic
quadrilateral and work out all the various things
okay so uh a which is the length of that side all
right so we have to take the difference here and
square it take the difference here and square it
add those two squares and then we have to take
the square root as we like to do don't we we take
the square root we spend the rest of Eternity uh
generating more and more digits of this square
root and at the end of Eternity there it is the
square root right so what we ended up getting is
that a is 413 the < tkk of 26 this happy little
notation allows us to shortcut the actual infinite
process and pretend that we have done that process
well in fact all what we've really done is just
write a little bit of a squiggle with a 26 under
it similarly we can calculate that this length
B is 6 17 * the < TK of 17 this length C is 18
85 * the < TK of 170 and D is 1465 * the < TK
of 65 and from my point of view all of these
statements are very much in quotes right because I
actually do not believe in the existence of any of
these objects and neither should you so what we're
doing now is playing along with the standard game
okay so if we wanted to play the standard game
and verify paramet far as formula well here it is
again now R 2 the numerator there the denominator
all in terms of a b and c and d now what is r in
this case well R is the square root of two the
radius R squ conveniently is two okay that's good
that's at least rational so the claim is that if
we replace little a b c and d in this big formula
with all these things and make the calculation
then at the end we get two so does it work well
I encourage you to see whether it works right so
what we have to do is we actually have to make
a real number calculation we have to stick these
things in here we have to take a * B to multiply
this time this we have to multiply C * D and then
we have to add those two things okay then we have
to do the same thing for this expression the same
thing for this expression and and then we have to
multiply this real number times this real number
times this real number well on my computer if I
set the accuracy to 10 significant digits and I
ask my computer what the numerator is here after
having done that computation I get 32739 4261 of
course we all know that's not really the correct
answer is it there's a few trillion trillion
trillion in fact there's an infinite number
of digits that we have truncated conveniently
but they're there aren't they oh yes they're
there what about the denominator well
the same kind of story you plug all
these things in make the calculation and
the computer tells you that you get 16365
4713 dot dot dot right and then I
get my computer to calculate this
thing divided by this thing equals
and my computer tells me that I get
2.0000
1 okay so have we verified pyr
mes varus formula what do you
think well it's certainly the case
that they're pretty close the left
hand side and the right hand side
are pretty close are they exactly
correct well that depends really I mean if we're
talking about exact correctness then every single
one of those infinite amount of decimal digits
that we are dropping is actually important you
change any one of them just slightly and then
you're going to get inaccuracy you're going get
an incorrect result so how are you going to
actually verify that the formula is actually
correct in this case precisely correct so I
urge you to uh to have go with this try your
with your calculator see what happens when you
make this calculation all right so there's also
a non-convex form of paramesvara formula and
this is the situation that we're imagining we
have a CLI quadrilateral but now not a convex
one but rather one that goes a b c d like this
okay it's still consisting of four lengths still
we have four points on a circle we can still ask
for the relationship between the four lengths and
the radius R and here is the non-convex form of
this result R 2 is now AB minus cd- a + BD and a
D minus BC and the denominator is also a little
bit different it's 16 s * s - Aus b s - a - c s -
Aus D where s is as we before the sum of the four
lengths divided by two well we can recognize
that this can be written this way here this
denominator is again the quadria of this nonconvex
quadrilateral 16 * the square of the area still
makes sense for a non-convex quadrilateral and in
fact we've seen that in this case the um Quadra
can also be written this way here so it's a little
bit like the Gupta formula but the nature of these
things is different there's either zero minus
signs or there's two minus signs in various
places now I'm not sure where this result was
actually first uh established um I'm pretty
sure that par mvar didn't have this formula um
but I suspect it was probably a 19th century uh
development but I'm not really sure who to credit
this formula for so if any of you know uh I'd be
kind of curious as to what the uh the origins
of this variant are so let's have a look at an
example in this non-convex case we'll choose the
same Circle as we did previously and the same four
points on it but we'll Traverse those four points
in a non-convex fashion say from here to here to
here to here to here so with lengths a b c and
d okay we can compute those lengths uh couple
of them are familiar and there'll be two new ones
there's a a there's B there's C and there's D okay
and here's our formula for R squar which should
be two in terms of these four numbers and again
we can try to do this real number arithmetic but
of course we are not really able to do this real
number arithmetic one is never able to do the
real number arithmetic unless it's a triviality
just the way it is but uh we can pretend
that we're doing the real number arithmetic
as we do and plug these things in do everything
approximately so on my computer the numerator is
24.45mm from which I conclude that this is a
pretty good formula but is it actually correct or
not H not so clear is it even verifying it in this
one particular case to say whether it's actually
completely true in this particular case is rather
challenging that's the way it always is when
you're doing real number arithmetic it's always
a challenge which is why texts carefully avoid
actually laying out examples like this because
it would become very quickly obvious to students
that wait a minute there's a little bit of uh
pulling the rug here okay there's some obvious
inadequacy in making claims about things which
are based on this real number arithmetic which we
can't actually do completely so we would like to
establish an algebraic reformulation of paramaras
formula one that we could first of all generalize
to arbitrary fields and to other geometries like
the red geometry and one that we could actually
verify completely by doing finite ordinary High
School arithmetic on specific examples okay so
it turns out that the key formula that we're
going to need is one that we're pretty familiar
with but a rather imposing one it's the projector
quadruple quad formula okay so I remind you that
here is our core circle with equation X2 + y^2 = x
here we have a cyclic quadrilateral on that core
Circle and here are the quadrant is now capital a
capital b capital c capital D these are the purely
algebraic equivalents of the lengths they are just
given by the sums of the differences squared of
the X and Y coordinates and we know that in this
particular case for this particular Circle these
four quadrant satisfy R of a b c d equal Z where
R is our projective quadruple quad function and
we determine that because this formula originally
came from the one-dimensional situation involving
these projective one points so it turned out that
the projective quadrants between this projective
one point and this projective one point is the
same as this aine quadrants capital A so it was
the relationship between the four projective
coordinates of those four projective one points
that allowed us to conclude that there's this
corresponding relation between these four
quadrants of this core circle now this core
Circle has a circum quadrants of/ 12 squared
or one4 the diameter quadrants is one and we
saw the situation when we were talking about the
triple quad formula and the triple spread formula
that the dilation uh of this basic Circle affected
the uh the formula in the sense that this is not a
homogeneous formula and so we ended up seeing that
the amount that we dilated by got involved in the
formula so exactly the same kind of situation
is going to be playing a big role here okay
but this is the sort of the important uh thing
that we need to understand I'll have to remind
you about this projective quadruple quad formula
all right so here is our projective quadruple quad
formula and it was a quite a imposing function so
R of say A B C D is so there's some big quantity
all squared and that big quantity has a + b
+ C + d 2 in it - 2 a 2 + b 2 + C 2 + d^ 2
and then - 4 AB C plus ABD plus a CD plus b
c d and plus 8 AB CD so all of that squared
and now we subtract from that 64 the product
a b c d * the product 1 - A 1 - b 1 - c 1 -
D okay was some kind of higher dimensional
extension of the apine quadruple quad formula
which it reverts to if a b c and d are small we
could ignore uh terms of higher degree now when
we get to more complicated formulas like this it's
very useful for us to employ a some notation that
comes from the theory of polinomial and symmetric
polinomial this is something that we are going to
be talking about it's a very interesting uh
topic but let me just informally introduce
four important things called the elementary
symmetric expressions in little a b c and
d so these are expressions that we can write
down that are sort of symmetric with respect
to these things if we interchange two of them
it doesn't change so there's E1 which is just
the sum of all four there's E2 which is the sum
of all possible products of different ones so a
plus a c plus a d plus b c plus b d plus C D so
all the possible ways of multiplying two of these
things E3 is ABC plus ABD plus a CD plus BC
D all the possible ways of multiplying three
of them together and adding them up and E4
is just the single product of all four of
them okay so here's a interesting exercise
for you to show that you can rewrite this
thing here more compactly by sort of
using these as the building blocks
so we can write it as E1 2 - 4 E2 +
E3 all squared - 16 E1 - 2^ 2 * E4
it's a pleasant kind of thing in particular if say
you decided to set D equal to zero well then this
term here would become zero so that whole term
would disappear and then you would just end up
with this thing here you might like to see what
that thing is all right so there's a pleasant um
rewriting of this thing showing that this thing
is in fact a symmetric a polinomial and there's
in fact a very important theorem around that
goes back to Newton which is that basically any
symmetric polinomial that you can write down in a
b c d can be written this way as some combination
of these Elementary symmetric pols so there's
some interesting theory around here which I
am going to be talking about a little bit later
on we need a little bit more talking about poly
numbers in different uh Dimensions to do that
correctly all right so here is my version of
the paramesvara formula in a purely rational
algebraic formulation we'll call it the cylic
quadrilateral circum quadrants theorem and it is
that if a cylic quadrilateral has quadrants is a
b CD on a circle of quadrants K so a situation
like this there a circle of quadrants K we
have a cyclic quadrilateral quadrants is are
capital a capital b capital c capital D then
the relationship between these five things is
given by this algebraic equation P * K ^ 2 - 2
q k + r = 0 where PQ and R are expressions
obtained from the four quadrants p is Q of ab
c d where that is the quadruple quad function the
apine one which is given by this expression hope
you remember that or at least that it looks
familiar the Q here is this expression it's
a little bit more complicated so there's an Aus b
c * b d - A C * a + b - c - D Plus plus a similar
kind of term a D minus b c * c d - A * a - b +
cus D plus a similar kind of term b d - A C * c
d - A * - A + B + C - D and finally where this
R equals the product a D minus BC * bdus a * Aus
CD okay and this uh formula appeared
as theorem 111 in my book Divine
proportions there's lots of interesting theorems
in my book Divine proportions and if you really
want to go in this direction and understand s
of algebraic mathematics more deeply um after
you've gone through these lectures probably
be really good idea to go through my book very
carefully there's a lot more m material there
a lot of additional insights and opportunities
for learning uh mathematics correctly okay
so we want to see well how does this thing
work and why is it true and how does it
connect with the paramesvara formula that
we've already seen it looks on the surface
to be quite different so let me give you an
example in fact let's have a look at the same
example that we looked at earlier over the real
numbers and now we're going to look at it over
the rational numbers the way God really meant
us to look at things so here are our same
points but now the relevant objects are the
quadrant so just difference in x coordinates
squared plus difference in y-coordinates squared
so calculating a quadrants is something you can do
with pen and paper it only takes you a minute or
two and at the end of that minute or two you have
the exact answer no waffling necessary no appeal
to infinite processes no pots of gold at the end
of rainbows so capital A is 32 over 13 B is 36
over 17 C is 648 over 85 D is 196 over 65 and our
quadrants K is going to be two the quadrants of
this circle okay so here is our theorem that the
relationship between these five things is that
P k^2 - 2 q k + r = 0 where p q and R are those
rather lengthy Expressions built from these four
numbers okay there may be lengthy Expressions but
it's all just High School arithmetic you're just
multiplying adding subtracting um maybe a bit of
division but no there's no division just adding
multiplying and subtracting and you can calculate
these quantities and then you can write out this
quadratic equation and it turns out that that
quadratic equation factors and here's what you
end up getting so you end up getting some
constant which is this big fraction because
there's lots of numbers that appear but When
the Smoke Clears the quadratic that you've got
factors as K minus 2 * 24359 K minus 12,430 from
which you can include that k = 2 or k = 12,430 /
24359 so the algebra is giving us a solution to
what we want it's also giving us some additional
information this is another possibility that
perhaps corresponds to a situation where the
data is the same as what we've given it
but maybe the picture looks different or
maybe it's something that's VIs ible in
some other kind of geometry in any case
the algebra is suggesting that this is
not the entire story there's something
else out there as well that we could look
at if we were interested but if we were
only interested in figuring out what this
quadrant was in this particular situation
we could deduce that k equals 2 after examining
the various possibilities numerically using our
picture so I hope we appreciate
the difference the huge difference
between this kind of arithmetic and the
previous kind of arithmetic involving real
numbers we can actually lay out the example
make the calculation everybody can check
there's no cheating it's completely solid this
is mathematics okay so a fundamental question
is how do we establish this cyclic quadrilateral
circum quadrants formula P k^2 - 2 q k + r = 0 a
formula for the circum quadrants of the circle
which contains a cyclic quadrilateral with
these quadrants as a b c and d and P Q and R are
those rather lengthy Expressions built from the
a b c and DS that I showed you on the previous
page so it turns out that it's actually rather
conceptually simple and follows go very much
along the lines of an earlier investigation
on the relationship between a triangle and
the quadrants of the circle that goes through
those three points so the basic idea is that
if we have a cyclic quadrilateral like this
with quadrants A B C D and circum quadrants
k then if we rescale if we rescale things
so that we end up with a circle which is the
same size as a core Circle then we know what
the relationship between the corresponding
quadrants is is it's given by our R formula
and what do we have to rescale by well if
the quadrants here is k then the diameter
quadrants is 4K so what we need to do is we
need to rescale by 4K so in other words if we
divide each of these quadran is by 4K then we're
going to get four quadrant which lie on a core
Circle and then the r function applied to them
will be zero so R of a over 4K B over 4K C over
4K D over 4K equals z this follows from rescaling
and the fact that we know about the story for a
cyclic quadrilateral on the core Circle and it
turns out that when you take this expression
and you sort of clear the denominators you will
get somewhat surprisingly a quadratic equation
in K and it has exactly the coefficients that
I said it did so this is a great exercise for
you to do to show how this formula follows
from this one basically just by clearing the
fractions so it's really a very remarkable thing
that it really comes down to this one-dimensional
result about four projective one points uh in
this one-dimensional projective line situation
all right so let's have a look now and see why
this formulation incorporates the paramesvara kind
of formulas both in the convex and the non-convex
situation so with this quadratic equation if we're
interested in the two solutions say K1 and K2 then
the product of these two solutions is going to
be R over P it's a general fact of a quadratic
equation and R was this product here and P was
the quadruple quad formula applied to Capital
a b c and d now suppose that our quadrant are
actually squares of things so suppose that we
have some lengths around say little a b c and
d so that little A squar is capital A little B
squar is capital B and so on then each of these
terms in the numerator is going to be a difference
of squares so that this thing here will actually
be little a d plus BC time little a D minus BC and
similarly this one here will be BD + AC * BD minus
a and this one AB plus CD AB minus CD so these
are the numerators that appear in the convex and
non-convex form of the parara formula and what
about the denominator well we have to remember
that when we have cyclic quadrilaterals and we
know the quadrant is then the quadras are also
determined by a quadratic equation that's what we
call the cyclic quadrilateral quadria theorem and
part of that told us that the product of those
quadras is going to be exactly this quadruple
quad function applied to a b c and d so we can
take this term and separate it into the quadria
of the convex quadrilateral times the quadria of
the non-convex quadrilateral and when we do that
we see that this is exactly the formula for the R
2 or the K1 value for the paramara formula in the
convex case and here it is for the non-convex case
so our formula somehow is getting both the convex
and non-convex situations at the same time it does
not want to separate them because the algebra does
not want to distinguish between the convex and
non-convex case the algebra doesn't see that
so clearly just wants to treat them together
and treating them together since there's two
of them is natural to give a quadratic equation
this is something that we have to expect with
this approach to mathematics that the algebraic
approach is going to get bigger in complexity in
degree as the number of options increases so
um the algebra wants to take care of all the
possibilities at once so to speak that's nice
orientation to have an important understanding
to have that uh we want to look at all the
possibilities at once and the algebra helps us
to do that so I think that I have given you over
the last dozen so videos plenty of solid evidence
to support the idea that thinking algebraically
about fundamental geometrical concepts is a
powerful idea so we've been able to look at
Heron's formula tomm theorem brahmagupta formula
Bret nbon Stout formula the par mvar formula
and we've been able in each case to first of
all state them completely clearly and accurately
give proper proofs completely algebraic watertight
proofs and generalize them both to more General
fields and to other geometries it's a major
accomplishment really if you think that these
are historically amongst the most uh important
formulas in all of mathematics and there's clearly
a lot of new opportunities to keep going in this
direction we can see that we've just really been
scratching the surface because we've only really
been investigating one-dimensional geometry and
the various consequences of some simple formulas
from there there's still two-dimensional geometry
waiting to be laid out and I will eventually do
that and then three-dimensional geometry higher
dimensional geometries a lot of more extensions
a lot of you might want to play around with those
directions yourselves so it's time now for us to
turn our attention to Modern set theory there
are a lot of very serious weaknesses with that
subject unfortunately and many of them are
intimately connected with the weaknesses in
modern analysis starting from the construction
of real numbers and their arithmetic we'll have
a look at set theory from a larger point of view
thinking of that as only one aspect of a larger
uh sort of understanding of data structures
and Mathematics but probably a good place to
at least start a conversation about this is
with a very simple and fundamental question
of what exactly is a set I hope you'll join
me for that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for
listening